Create rule S6968: Actions that return a value should be annotated with ProducesResponseTypeAttribute containing the return type (#3865)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S6968/csharp/rule.adoc

> In an https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core[ASP.NET Core] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_API[Web API], controller actions can optionally return a result value. If a controller action returns a value in the https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Happy_path[happy path], annotating the action with one of the https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.mvc.producesresponsetypeattribute[`++[ProducesResponseType]++`] overloads that describe the type is recommended.

Reviewer: ```
can optionally return a result value. 
```
I cannot fully understand what is a result value. Maybe you can add some documentation link or an example?

Reviewer 2: It's a valid point, but I am not sure how to do that.
What I mean to say is that you can return either:

- `Ok()`
- `Ok(value)`

In the first case, you are returning a naked 200 OK.
In the second case, you are returning a 200 OK with some content on the response body.

If you have any ideas how to show this, let me know.

Reviewer: I'd go for something like:
```suggestion
In an https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core[ASP.NET Core] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_API[Web API], controller actions can optionally return a result value. If a controller action returns a [StatusCodeResult value](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.mvc.statuscoderesult) in the https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Happy_path[happy path], annotating the action with one of the https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.mvc.producesresponsetypeattribute[`++[ProducesResponseType]++`] overloads that describe the type is recommended.
```

Reviewer 2: Good idea, but I chose a different method.
The rule will not raise for `StatusCodeResult`, because it does not have a value in the response.

== Why is this an issue?

> If an ASP.NET Core Web API uses https://swagger.io/[Swagger], the API documentation will be generated based on the types returned and accepted by the controller actions, as well as the attributes annotating the actions. If an action returns https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.mvc.iactionresult[IActionResult] or https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.http.iresult[IResult], Swagger cannot infer the type of the response. From the consumer's perspective, this can be confusing and lead to unexpected results and bugs in the long run, without the API provider being aware of it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an ASP.NET Core Web API uses https://swagger.io/[Swagger], the API documentation will be generated based on the input/output types of the controller actions, as well as the attributes annotating the actions. If an action returns https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.mvc.iactionresult[IActionResult] or https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.http.iresult[IResult], Swagger cannot infer the type of the response. From the consumer's perspective, this can be confusing and lead to unexpected results and bugs in the long run without the API provider's awareness.
```

This rule raises an issue on a controller action when:

> * It returns a value in the happy path. This can be either:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The action returns a value in the happy path. This can be either:
```

    ** https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/200[200 OK]
    ** https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/201[201 Created]
    ** https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/202[202 Accepted]
* There is no `++[ProducesResponseType]++` attribute containing the return type, either at controller or action level.
* There is no `++[SwaggerResponse]++` attribute containing the return type, either at controller or action level.

> * The controller is marked with the https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.mvc.apicontrollerattribute[`++[ApiController]++`] attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The controller is annotated with the https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.mvc.apicontrollerattribute[`++[ApiController]++`] attribute.
```

* The application has enabled the https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/tutorials/getting-started-with-swashbuckle#add-and-configure-swagger-middleware[Swagger middleware].

== How to fix it

There are multiple ways to fix this issue:

* Annotate the action with https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.mvc.producesresponsetypeattribute[`++[ProducesResponseType]++`] containing the return type.
* Annotate the action with https://github.com/domaindrivendev/Swashbuckle.AspNetCore/blob/master/README.md#enrich-response-metadata[SwaggerResponse Class] containing the return type.
* Return https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.mvc.actionresult-1[ActionResult<TValue>] instead of `++[IActionResult]++` or `++[IResult]++`.
* Return https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.http.httpresults.results-2[Results<TResult1, TResult2>] instead of `++[IActionResult]++` or `++[IResult]++`.

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,csharp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----

> [HttpGet("foo")]

Reviewer: I'd add here one more example where the action is annotated with the `ProduceResponseType` but does not contain the generics.

Reviewer 2: Good point.
I added a second example, and I also annotated it with the type-less `ProducesResponseType`, to show that we raise even then.

* Microsoft Learn - https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.mvc.apicontrollerattribute[ApiControllerAttribute Class]
* Microsoft Learn - https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.mvc.producesresponsetypeattribute[ProducesResponseTypeAttribute Class]
* Microsoft Learn - https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.mvc.producesresponsetypeattribute-1[ProducesResponseTypeAttribute<T> Class]
* Microsoft Learn - https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.mvc.actionresult-1[ActionResult<TValue> Class]
* Microsoft Learn - https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.http.httpresults.results-2[Results<TResult1, TResult2> Class]
* Microsoft Learn - https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/web-api/action-return-types#httpresults-type[HttpResults type]
* GitHub - https://github.com/domaindrivendev/Swashbuckle.AspNetCore/blob/master/README.md#enrich-response-metadata[SwaggerResponse Class]
* SmartBear - https://swagger.io/[Swagger]

ifdef::env-github,rspecator-view[]

== Implementation Specification
(visible only on this page)

=== Message

> * Annotate this method with ProducesResponseType containing the return type for successful responses.

Reviewer: There should be one more message here.
Something like -> "Use the ProducesResponseType overload with the type" or something.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand what you mean.
You want me to rephrase or conditionally choose a message?
Can you give an example?

Reviewer: I'd have two messages:
1. Message for when the action is not annotated at all with ProducesResponseType<T>
2. Message for when the action is annotated with ProducesResponseType without <T>

WDYT?

Reviewer 2: Good idea!
I fixed the tests as well.
